docs(manifest): Improvements to `orientation` page (#35977)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/manifest/orientation/index.md

}

.device {
  width: 200px;
  height: 300px;
  border: 5px solid black;
  border-radius: 20px;
  position: relative;
  background-color: white;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
}

.screen {
  width: 180px;
  height: 280px;
  border-radius: 15px;
  background-color: lightgrey;
  margin: 10px;
  overflow: hidden;
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
}

.title-bar {
  background-color: #4285f4;
  color: white;
  padding: 5px;
  text-align: center;
  font-weight: bold;
}

.content {
  flex-grow: 1;
  display: flex;
  justify-content: center;
  align-items: center;
  padding: 10px;
  text-align: center;
}

.landscape-primary,
.landscape-secondary {
  width: 300px;
  height: 200px;
}

.landscape-primary .screen,
.landscape-secondary .screen {
  width: 280px;
  height: 180px;
}

.portrait-secondary {
  transform: rotate(180deg);
}

.landscape-secondary {
  transform: rotate(180deg);
}

.label {
  margin-top: 10px;
  font-family: Arial, sans-serif;
  font-size: 15px;
}
```

{{EmbedLiveSample('Description', '', 800)}}

### Scope and default behavior

The specified `orientation` is applied to all top-level {{Glossary("Browsing context", "browsing contexts")}} of the web app.

> If a browser supports the `orientation` value, it will use this as the default orientation for the web app throughout the life of the web app, unless overridden at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a browser supports the `orientation` value, it will use this as the default orientation for the web app throughout its lifespan, unless overridden at runtime.
```

Author: Updating as:

> If a browser supports the specified `orientation` value, it will use this as the default app orientation throughout the app's lifespan, unless overridden at runtime.

### Manifest `orientation` vs. Screen Orientation API behavior

While the `orientation` manifest member sets the default orientation of the web app, the orientation of a top-level browsing context can be changed once the web app is running using the [Screen Orientation API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Screen_Orientation_API).

The `orientation` values are similar across the web app manifest and the Screen Orientation API, but their behavior and purposes differ.

- Web app manifest:

  - Suggests the preferred default orientation of the web app using the `orientation` manifest member.
  - Sets the initial orientation when the app is launched.

- Screen Orientation API:

  - Uses orientation values to lock the screen to a specific orientation.
  - Allows dynamic changes to orientation during runtime (for example, locking orientation using {{domxref("ScreenOrientation.lock", "screen.orientation.lock()")}}).

  > [!NOTE]
  > The Screen Orientation API's [`lock()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/ScreenOrientation/lock) method has limited support across browsers.

>   > Check its compatibility if you plan to use this it to dynamically change screen orientation during runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > Check its compatibility if you plan to use it to dynamically change screen orientation during runtime.
```

{{QuickLinksWithSubpages("/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest")}}

The `orientation` manifest member is used to specify the default screen orientation for your web application, which defines how it should be displayed when launched and during use, particularly on mobile devices.

## Syntax

```json-nolint
/* Keyword values */
"orientation": "natural"
"orientation": "portrait"
"orientation": "portrait-primary"
"orientation": "portrait-secondary"
"orientation": "landscape"
"orientation": "landscape-primary"
"orientation": "landscape-secondary"
"orientation": "any"

```

### Values

- `orientation`

>   - : A string with a keyword value, which includes:

Author: Agree, it is reading odd. I wanted to convey that the value can be one of the keywords. This might be better:

>   - : A string that specifies a default orientation for the web app. The value must be one of the following keywords:

>   - : A string with a keyword value, which includes:

Reviewer: I have read your update, and it looks much better now. Marking this as resolved.

    - `natural`

>       - : Displays the web app in the most natural orientation(s) for the device, as determined by the operating system, browser, user settings or the screen itself.

Author: Valid point. I don't know why I wrote "orientation(s). Updating as:

>  - : Displays the web app in the most natural orientation for the device, as determined by the browser, operating system, user settings, or the screen itself.

>       - : Displays the web app in the most natural orientation(s) for the device, as determined by the operating system, browser, user settings or the screen itself.

Reviewer: Perfect. Resolving.

        Typically, this is `portrait-primary` for mobile phones and `landscape-primary` for computer monitors and tablets.

        On devices with a natural portrait orientation:

>         - `portrait-primary` is 0 degrees.

Author: This and your other questions on the value descriptions made me again look into app orientation vs screen orientation. Thanks for the nudge!

I've now redone all value descriptions and removed the reference to angles (those are mentioned more with relations to screen orientations (https://www.w3.org/TR/screen-orientation/#the-current-screen-orientation-type-and-angle)). 

I've also added some more clarifying info in the "Description" section to differentiate between device vs screen vs app orientation.

>         - `portrait-primary` is 0 degrees.

Reviewer: I've read through it all again. This is great, much improved.

        On devices with a natural landscape orientation:

        - `landscape-primary` is 0 degrees.
        - `portrait-primary` is 90 degrees.
        - `landscape-secondary` is 180 degrees (vertical flip from `landscape-primary`).
        - `portrait-secondary` is 270 degrees (horizontal flip from `portrait-primary`).

        This setting restricts the web app to the device's inherent orientation preference, which may be a single orientation or a limited set of orientations considered natural for that device.

    - `portrait`

      - : Displays the web app in portrait mode, where the screen height is greater than the screen width.
        This is a general setting that may include `portrait-primary` or `portrait-secondary` or both, depending on the platform convention.

    - `portrait-primary`

      - : Displays the web app in the primary portrait mode.
        On devices with a natural portrait orientation, this is the same as the natural orientation (0 degrees).
        On devices with a natural landscape orientation, this is 90 degrees clockwise from the natural orientation.

    - `portrait-secondary`

      - : Displays the web app in the secondary portrait mode.

>         This is typically the default `portrait` orientation.

Author: Likely might have been a copy paste error. Thanks for spotting! Moved this to `portrait-primary`

        On devices with a natural portrait orientation, this is upside down (180 degrees).
        On devices with a natural landscape orientation, this is 270 degrees clockwise from the natural orientation.

    - `landscape`

      - : Displays the web app in landscape mode, where the screen width is greater than the screen height.
        This is a general setting that may include `landscape-primary` or `landscape-secondary` or both, depending on the platform convention.

    - `landscape-primary`

      - : Displays the web app in the primary landscape mode.

>         This is typically the default `landscape` orientation.

Author: Should be fixed now

        On devices with a natural landscape orientation, this is the same as the natural orientation (0 degrees).
        On devices with a natural portrait orientation, this is 90 degrees clockwise from the natural orientation.

    - `landscape-secondary`

      - : Displays the web app in the secondary landscape mode.
        On devices with a natural landscape orientation, this is upside down (180 degrees).
        On devices with a natural portrait orientation, this is 270 degrees clockwise from the natural orientation.

    - `any`
      - : Displays the web app in any orientation allowed by the device's operating system or user settings.
        This includes all possible orientations: `portrait-primary`, `portrait-secondary`, `landscape-primary`, and `landscape-secondary`.

>         This setting is the most flexible and allows the web app to be rotated freely between any of these orientations as permitted by the device.

Author: Done, all primary and secondary descriptions now convey that device rotation will not the app orientation

  </div>
  <div class="orientation">
    <div class="device landscape-secondary">
      <div class="screen"></div>
      <div class="button"></div>
    </div>
    <div class="label">Landscape Secondary</div>
  </div>
</div>
```

```css hidden
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr;
  grid-gap: 40px;
  padding: 20px;
}

.orientation {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  align-items: center;
  text-align: center;
}

.device {
  width: 200px;
  height: 300px;
  border: 5px solid black;
  border-radius: 20px;
  position: relative;
  background-color: white;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
}

.screen {
  width: 180px;
  height: 280px;
  border-radius: 20px;
  background-color: lightgrey;
  margin: 10px;
}

.button {
  width: 40px;
  height: 40px;
  border-radius: 50%;
  background-color: darkgrey;
  position: absolute;
  bottom: 5px;
  left: 50%;
  transform: translateX(-50%);
}

.landscape {
  transform: rotate(90deg);
}

.portrait-secondary {
  transform: rotate(180deg);
}

.landscape-secondary {
  transform: rotate(270deg);
}

.label {
  margin-top: 10px;
  font-family: Arial, sans-serif;
  font-size: 15px;
}
```

> {{EmbedLiveSample('Description', '', 800)}}

Reviewer: I love that you've created this with HTML and CSS!

OK, this is going to sound really nitpicky, but the small circle looks a bit odd. I'm assuming you want this to represent the hardware button at the bottom of the screen on older iPads and Android phones? You could make it look more like one of those buttons with CSS like this:

```css
.button {
  width: 20px;
  height: 20px;
  border-radius: 5px;
  background-color: darkgrey;
  position: absolute;
  bottom: 20px;
  left: 50%;
  transform: translateX(-50%);
  border-top: 1px solid #888;
  border-left: 1px solid #888;
}
```

(you'd have to vary the sides the borders are on in each orientation, to make the shadowing look consistent).

Or, you could do away with the button and write "top" and "bottom" at the top and bottom in each case. But that wouldn't look as nice. 

Just some thoughts, anyway.

Author: I've redone the figures to remove the buttons, instead added app title bar to add a hint for the top edge of the app. I've also added more prose to explain this illustration.

Reviewer: Your updates are excellent. Resolving this.

By setting a specific orientation, you can ensure that your web app is displayed in the most optimal way for its content and user interface.

> For example, a video app is often better suited in landscape orientation, while a reading app typically works better in portrait orientation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a video app is often better suited to landscape orientation, while a reading app typically works better in portrait orientation.
```

### Scope and default behavior

The specified orientation is applied to all top-level {{Glossary("Browsing context", "browsing contexts")}} of the web app.

If a browser supports the value of the `orientation` member as the default screen orientation, it serves as the default screen orientation for the life of the web app (unless overridden by some other means at runtime).
This means that browsers will revert to this default screen orientation whenever the top-level browsing context is navigated.

### Manifest vs. Screen Orientation API behavior

The `orientation` values are similar across the web app manifest and the [Screen Orientation API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Screen_Orientation_API), but their behavior and purpose differ.

> - Web app manifest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Web app manifest:
```

  - The `orientation` manifest member suggests a preferred default orientation for the web app.
  - It sets the initial orientation when the app is launched.

> - Screen Orientation API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Screen Orientation API:
```

>   - It uses the orientation values to actively lock the screen to a specific orientation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Uses orientation values to lock the screen to a specific orientation.
```

>   - It allows dynamic changes to orientation during runtime (e.g., `screen.orientation.lock()`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Allows dynamic changes to orientation during runtime (for example locking orientation using {{domxref("ScreenOrientation.lock", "screen.orientation.lock()")}})
```

> [!NOTE]

> > While the `orientation` manifest member sets the default orientation of the web app, the orientation of a top-level browsing context can be changed once the web app is running. This can be done through various means, such as using the [Screen Orientation API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Screen_Orientation_API).

Reviewer: Is this note needed? It basically says the same thing as your bullets above. This seems repetitive as-is.

Author: Yeah, removed it from here. In fact, sticking thes note back to the top of the page where it was in the previous version

> Remember that although it is encouraged, browsers may or may not implement the Screen Orientation API.

Reviewer: This wording is a bit odd. Maybe change it to something like "The Screen Orientation API has limited browser support. Check compatibility carefully before using."?

Reviewer: Also maybe make it a note if you agree with my previous comment about removing the note.

Author: Added this note:

  > [!NOTE]
  > The Screen Orientation API's [`lock()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/ScreenOrientation/lock) method has limited support across browsers.
  > Check its compatibility if you plan to use this it to dynamically change screen orientation during runtime.

### Platform and browser limitations

> Certain UI/UX concerns and platform conventions may limit which screen orientations and [`display`]((/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/display) modes can be used together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain UI/UX concerns and platform conventions may limit which screen orientations and [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/display) modes can be used together.
```

Reviewer: (extra paren is currently breaking the link)

Browser vendors and device manufacturers decide which orientations and display modes are compatible.
For example, some browsers might not allow changing the default screen orientation of a web app while in [`"display": "browser"`](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/display#browser) mode.

Support for specific values may vary depending on the device and platform.
For example, some devices may not support `portrait-secondary` or `landscape-secondary` orientations.

## Examples

### Setting the default orientation for a web app

This example sets the default orientation to `portrait-primary`, which is a typical natural orientation for most mobile devices.

```json
{
  "name": "My Web App"
  "orientation": "portrait-primary"
}
```

### Setting the default orientation for a photo viewing and editing app

> Consider this example of a photo viewing and editing app that works on both mobile phones and tablets. In the app's manifest file, as shown below, the `orientation` is set to `any`, allowing the app to launch in the device's current orientation. The main gallery view of the app adapts to both `portrait` and `landscape` orientations. When a user selects an image for detailed viewing or editing, the app can use the Screen Orientation API to suggest `landscape` orientation for a wider editing canvas on tablets.

Reviewer: Thinking about how patchy Screen Orientation API support is, is it wise to recommend using it for this kind of purpose? The [Screen Orientation API docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Screen_Orientation_API) suggests not, and actually link to a guide where this is done using CSS media queries.

Author: Agree, removed the reference to the API and made the example prose a bit more generic
